Hi, this is Vadimor. In this video I want to introduce a new topic, which we are going to discuss this week. This topic is theories. So we're going to talk about a theory, what it is, how it works, what kind of theories are out there. So I would share with you now the way how I think about this concept, the same way as I did the previous week. I'm going to reflect on the concept of theory for 10 minutes and maybe 15 minutes. And then I would encourage you to do the same to prepare for a discussion, just to think about the theory. Try to talk about it. Try to see what you actually know before you join the discussion. Since when you have a vague understanding of what a theory is and you believe that you're going to be able to talk about it for half an hour, for two hours, as we usually have conversations for two hours. And then you come and join the discussion, what might happen often is that you're going to say something about it for a couple of minutes and that's it, and you're going to get lost. That's why I recommend you to set your thoughts in order before you join the conversation by talking about the same topic for 10 or 15 minutes. And once again, what I'm going to do now, I'm going to show you how I prepare for a conversation by focusing on a specific topic and trying to understand what it is, how it works, what I actually know about this topic, what I can say about this topic, what is meaningful or not meaningful, what is useful or what is not useful. Since I have a lot of knowledge about various theories, but if I'm going to talk about them freely, none of it is going to sound really meaningful. I'm going to just move from one experience to another. I'm going to tell you lots of things which are somehow connected in my memory, like I studied speech act theory in 2021. I studied lots of social theories in 2022. I studied psychological theories way back in 2011, 12, 13, 14, reading Freud, Jung, German theorists. What were their names? It doesn't matter. Listening to lectures on YouTube from Moscow State University by Valery Petukhov. There's an amazing course of lectures on psychological theories and listening to people like Durand Pearson and others. But anyway, I'm saying that if I'm not prepared, most of it is going to just be really messy and there's not going to be any serious discussion. So before to get a discussion, I need to make clear what I actually want to discuss. And to make it clear, I have to focus my mind on the concept itself and find out what I know about it and what is relevant for this discussion and what is not relevant. So the reason, first of all, the reason why I want to talk about theories is the fact that I have finished reading my first German book. I tried to read other books in German, but I haven't succeeded. So usually I give up after 10, 15, 20 pages since my German now is not really so powerful. And even this book, while I was reading it, I understood only like 50 percent, maybe even less than 50 percent. Maybe at the end I reached the level where I was able to understand 50 percent of what I was reading in terms of words and vocabulary. I probably understood more, but the general, after I read five or 10 pages, like what I have in my mind, the amount of information I can retain, it's really not that much. And I estimate that 50 percent or something like this, I could reinterpret or interpret what has been going on in the chapter. But it's structured in a way there are multiple chapters. Like one chapter is usually two, three pages long. And after reading the chapter or sometimes a few chapters, I tried to reconstruct the content, like what was going on there and use the German, trying to think in German. And most of the time I could do only like the basic, the name of the chapter, the basic concepts, how they are related, but in a very superficial way. But anyway, so this was the book. I read it and now I'm interested in talking about various theories. So the book presents mainly the theories in sociology and cultural theories or theories of literature developed in the 20th century. It does not have any specific theory as its focus. So it basically has German theories, French theories and theorists and their approach to understand what a society is, what a culture is, what an ideology is. Is there any way to make a bridge between different theories developed in different languages that propose a specific framework to discuss society, to discuss science? Yeah, there's a discussion about scientific theories as well. So he talks about various concepts developed by Kuhn and Popper. They basically talk about falsifiability and plausibility like other things. But yeah, anyway, so I'm really interested in discussing this topic. And I think we can go and talk about theories in three ways. So the first way is basically we can take various theories that we know, scientific theories maybe. And by know, I don't mean like we have to be experts in these theories. At least we have to have common knowledge about what a general relativity is or what a quantum mechanics is or what the theory of evolution is, like what it deals with, what kind of things it studies, what kind of concepts it uses to study these things, what kind of method it uses to support its assumptions, what kind of assumptions it has. So all these things, we may just start by talking about different theories that we are familiar with. And we may probably compare theories developed by various hard sciences like physics, biology and chemistry, theories developed by soft sciences like psychology or sociology. I'm not sure to what extent economy is a hard or a soft science. To me, I think that it's somewhere in between. But yeah, I may be wrong. It doesn't matter. So we can compare these theories not in the sense like what they are talking about, but in the sense how like what common is to all of them, since the theory of evolution and the theory of psychoanalysis. Yeah, there are absolutely to me when I think about their methods and their concepts, their way of dealing with what they try to study and understand. Yeah, I don't see how you can make a bridge between them and say this. They both represent a valid scientific theory. Psychoanalysis for me is not a scientific theory. It's just it's a philosophical theory. Yeah, philosophers, you may say, oh, it's a prior you have this uber-ich, super-ego, ich or ego and id or it, which also a part of your identity, your personality. So this is probably the most powerful part since you are not aware of the existence of this part in protocols that are unconscious. And when we think about the difference between the theory presented in biology, where you can go and investigate all these things which biology is supposed to study, you can see how they actually work. You can make experiments. You can confirm various hypotheses that you have about why this species has this characteristic and how it evolved and how it is distinguished from other species. So you can do an experimental science. And when you talk about psychoanalysis, again, you have this intellectual framework, a bunch of concepts which describe what a personality is and what kind of behavior or psychoanalysis doesn't focus on behavior. But still, it interprets the behavior and mainly pathological behavior of various individuals by appealing to their experience and their childhood, how they were raised and how they were brought up, whatever. And yet to me, again, it sounds a little bit more pseudoscientific. But anyway, it's a legitimate theory in psychologists and the field of psychology. It's not natural science. So we can't actually investigate directly and say what is the object of our study. Maybe behaviorism, again, just focus on behavior. But it seems to me that behaviorism, it's still a pretty new behaviorism. It's a quite popular theory, no matter how hard cognitive psychologists try to denounce it and devalue it. I think it pops up and it will pop up in the future as well. But yeah, discussion about various theories, like the distinction between the theories developed in hard sciences, theories developed in soft sciences, like what actually counts as a theory in the social sciences as well. There are so many theories in language. There are multiple competing theories about what the language is, how it works. Yeah, I have been studying the theory of speech act or speech acts since I shifted my thinking to English. I spent a lot of time, mainly since 2021, thinking about the speech act theory, various locutionary acts, ilocutionary acts, perlocutionary acts, etc., trying to interpret my language, not in metaphysical abstract concepts, but in various types of behavior. So for me, my speech, what I'm doing right now, is a kind of behavior. It has a purpose, it has an intention or multiple intentions behind this. And I'm trying to understand these intentions by observing my own behavior and inferring what stands behind these intentions, what kind of purposes my speech pursues. But yeah, okay, so I'm basically getting aside, so it's not important. The second part is the distinction, yeah, I said we can talk about three parts. The first part is comparing different theories. The second, and trying to figure out what is common to all these theories. The second part is the distinction between theory and practice. So we may talk about our experience and we may basically ask the question, is it actually necessary to have a theory about anything? When we study a language, when we study the first language, we usually don't have any theory about the language. We start as kids and we acquire language naturally without thinking about nouns or verbs or adjectives or prepositions or whatever articles. We just get it naturally and then when we
somehow integrate these words only later, maybe like five years after we start studying the language, focus on the theory. Yeah, and it's not just about language. We might talk about other things. Do we need a theory about how the world works to live? Do we need a theory about psychology, which explains us how psychology works to live? To what extent is it important? And I would assume that not a lot of people have a theory of psychology, even though everybody has a psyche. But very few actually understand any psychological theory. And yet they live, they do all sorts of things that are necessary in their life. And sometimes the theory may be actually misleading and even harmful. So you go about your daily business, you don't care about your theoretical framework, which helps you to understand on a kind of profound level what you're doing. But then you figure out that there is a theory which describes your behavior, which describes your place in the social hierarchy and how it evolved over hundreds and thousands of years. And then you start thinking about it seriously and you realize something that you haven't been able to realize before. And you ask yourself, what the hell have I just learned? Maybe I would be much better without all these theories. I'm just going to continue working, doing something. I'm just a farmer. I'm growing food and that's it. I don't want to know anything about physics and molecules and atoms and super ego or whatever, uber ish, etc. Okay, I've been talking for 15 minutes so far, even a little bit longer, 17 minutes. Yeah, I think it's enough for this first attempt to focus my attention, focus my mind on the concept of theory. Once again, I would encourage you to do the same if you are shy to record videos and publish them on the internet. You don't need to do that. You just may pick a recorder or your phone and just talk to yourself for 10 minutes, trying to describe your experience, try to see what you can say about the theory or theories, various theories, what you know about theories, how you can talk about them, what you want to say, what you don't want to say. Do it on your own, think about it at leisure. We're going to have a discussion. Yeah, I would encourage you to join our discussions. Even if you don't do what I'm saying now, even if you don't study anything, if you don't care about your knowledge and your understanding, you may still join and have a discussion. You're probably going to learn something about the theory or theories throughout the discussion. And yeah, that's basically all I wanted to say. See you at the end of the week. Bye-bye.
